README.md, before:

# StarryOS

[![CI](https://github.com/arceos-org/starry-next/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/arceos-org/starry-next/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

A monolithic kernel based on [ArceOS](https://github.com/arceos-org/arceos).

## Quick Start

### Build and Run through Docker
Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) in your system.

Then build all dependencies through provided dockerfile:

```bash
./scripts/get_deps.sh
cd .arceos
docker build -t starry -f Dockerfile .
```

Create a container and build/run app:
```bash
# back to the root directory of the project
cd ..
docker run --privileged --rm -it -v $(pwd):/starry -w /starry starry bash

# Now build/run app in the container
make user_apps
make defconfig
make run
```

### Manually Build and Run

#### 1. Install Build Dependencies

```bash
cargo install cargo-binutils axconfig-gen

sudo apt install libclang-dev cmake dosfstools build-essential
```

Download & install [musl](https://musl.cc) toolchains:

```bash
# download
wget https://musl.cc/aarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
wget https://musl.cc/riscv64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
wget https://musl.cc/x86_64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
wget https://github.com/LoongsonLab/oscomp-toolchains-for-oskernel/releases/download/loongarch64-linux-musl-cross-gcc-13.2.0/loongarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
# install
tar zxf aarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
tar zxf riscv64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
tar zxf x86_64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
tar zxf loongarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz

# exec below command in bash OR add below info in ~/.bashrc
export PATH=`pwd`/x86_64-linux-musl-cross/bin:`pwd`/aarch64-linux-musl-cross/bin:`pwd`/riscv64-linux-musl-cross/bin:`pwd`/loongarch64-linux-musl-cross/bin:$PATH
```

#### 2. Dependencies for running apps

```bash
# for Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt-get install qemu-system
```

```bash
# for macos
brew install qemu
```

Notice: The version of `qemu` should **be no less than 8.2.0**.

Other systems, arch and version please refer to [Qemu Download](https://www.qemu.org/download/#linux)

#### 3. Build & Run

```bash
# Clone the base repository
./scripts/get_deps.sh

# Run riscv64 example
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
# When running on a new architecture, you need to generate the configuration file again.
make ARCH=riscv64 defconfig
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y ACCEL=n run

# Run x86_64 example
make ARCH=x86_64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
# When running on a new architecture, you need to generate the configuration file again.
make ARCH=x86_64 defconfig
make ARCH=x86_64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y ACCEL=n run

# Run aarch64 example
make ARCH=aarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
make ARCH=aarch64 defconfig
make ARCH=aarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd ACCEL=n run

# Run Loongarch64 example
make ARCH=loongarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
make ARCH=loongarch64 defconfig
make ARCH=loongarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y ACCEL=n run

# Run another example (libc testcases)
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=libc user_apps
make ARCH=riscv64 defconfig
# When running libc testcases, you need to enable `fp_simd` feature.
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=libc BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd ACCEL=n run
```

#### 4. Commands Explanation

```bash
# Clone the base repository
./scripts/get_deps.sh

# Build user applications
make ARCH=<arch> AX_TESTCASE=<testcases> user_apps

# Build kernel
make ARCH=<arch> LOG=<log> AX_TESTCASE=<testcases> build

# Run kernel
make ARCH=<arch> LOG=<log> AX_TESTCASE=<testcases> run
```

Where `testcases` are shown under the `apps/` folder.

`<arch>` should be one of `riscv64`, `aarch64`, `x86_64`, `loongarch64`.

`<log>` should be one of `off`, `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug`, `trace`.

More arguments and targets can be found in [Makefile](./Makefile).

For example, to run the [nimbos testcases](apps/nimbos/) on `qemu-system-x86_64` with log level `info`:

```bash
make ARCH=x86_64 LOG=info AX_TESTCASE=nimbos run
```

Note: Arguments like `NET`, `BLK`, and `GRAPHIC` enable devices in QEMU, which take effect only at runtime, not at build time. More features can be found in the [Cargo.toml of arceos](https://github.com/oscomp/arceos/blob/main/ulib/axstd/Cargo.toml).

## Test for oscomp testcases

We can run [testcases of the OS competition](https://github.com/oscomp/testsuits-for-oskernel/tree/pre-2025) with StarryOS. Guidence can be found in [Starry-Tutorial](https://azure-stars.github.io/Starry-Tutorial-Book/ch03-02.html). 


And you can run the testcases with the following commands:

```bash
# Clone the base repository
./scripts/get_deps.sh

# run the testcases of oscomp on x86_64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=x86_64   # If it reports an error: -accel kvm: failed to initialize kvm: Permission denied, please add `ACCEL=n` argument.

# run the testcases of oscomp on riscv64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=riscv64

# run the testcases of oscomp on aarch64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=aarch64

# run the testcases of oscomp on loongarch64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=loongarch64
```

To run more testcases from oscomp, you can refer to the [oscomp README](./apps/oscomp/README.md).

## How to add new testcases

To allow the kernel to run user-written test cases, temporary test cases can be created. The specific steps are as follows:

   1. Create a temporary test case folder

      ```sh
      cd apps && mkdir custom && cd custom
      ```

   2. Create a `Makefile` in the current directory and fill in the following content:

      ```makefile
      all: build

      build:

      clean:
          rm -rf *.out
      ```

      The reason for creating an empty build `Makefile` is that when Starry packages test case images, it will first execute the test case's build program by default. However, since our temporary test case does not currently have a defined build program, `make all` does not need to perform any operations.

   3. Copy your compiled executable file into the current directory.

      Let's take a `hello_world` example. Create a `hello.c` file in the current directory and write the following content:

      ```c
      #include "syscall.h"
      
      int main()
      {
          char msg[] = "Hello, World!\n";
          write(1, msg, sizeof(msg));
          return 0;
      }
      ```

      Then, run the following command to compile it:

      ```sh
      x86_64-linux-musl-gcc -static hello.c -o hello
      ```

      This generates an x86_64 executable file in the current folder. Of course, you can also complete the compilation process elsewhere and directly copy the executable file into the current directory.

   4. Create a `testcase_list` file in the current directory and add the relative path of the executable file that needs to be executed. Note that this path should be relative to `apps/custom` (i.e., the current directory). In our example, the content should be:

      ```sh
      hello
      ```

   5. Return to the project root directory and run the following command:

      ```sh
      sudo ./build_img.sh -fs ext4 -file apps/custom
      cp disk.img .arceos/disk.img
      make defconfig
      make AX_TESTCASE=custom EXTRA_CONFIG=../configs/x86_64.toml ARCH=x86_64 BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd,lwext4_rs LOG=off ACCEL=n run
      ```

      This completes the execution of the custom test case.

Commit message:

[doc] Update README to customize testcases

README.md, after:

# StarryOS

[![CI](https://github.com/arceos-org/starry-next/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/arceos-org/starry-next/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

A monolithic kernel based on [ArceOS](https://github.com/arceos-org/arceos).

## Quick Start

### Build and Run through Docker
Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) in your system.

Then build all dependencies through provided dockerfile:

```bash
./scripts/get_deps.sh
cd .arceos
docker build -t starry -f Dockerfile .
```

Create a container and build/run app:
```bash
# back to the root directory of the project
cd ..
docker run --privileged --rm -it -v $(pwd):/starry -w /starry starry bash

# Now build/run app in the container
make user_apps
make defconfig
make run
```

### Manually Build and Run

#### 1. Install Build Dependencies

```bash
cargo install cargo-binutils axconfig-gen

sudo apt install libclang-dev cmake dosfstools build-essential
```

Download & install [musl](https://musl.cc) toolchains:

```bash
# download
wget https://musl.cc/aarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
wget https://musl.cc/riscv64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
wget https://musl.cc/x86_64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
wget https://github.com/LoongsonLab/oscomp-toolchains-for-oskernel/releases/download/loongarch64-linux-musl-cross-gcc-13.2.0/loongarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
# install
tar zxf aarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
tar zxf riscv64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
tar zxf x86_64-linux-musl-cross.tgz
tar zxf loongarch64-linux-musl-cross.tgz

# exec below command in bash OR add below info in ~/.bashrc
export PATH=`pwd`/x86_64-linux-musl-cross/bin:`pwd`/aarch64-linux-musl-cross/bin:`pwd`/riscv64-linux-musl-cross/bin:`pwd`/loongarch64-linux-musl-cross/bin:$PATH
```

#### 2. Dependencies for running apps

```bash
# for Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt-get install qemu-system
```

```bash
# for macos
brew install qemu
```

Notice: The version of `qemu` should **be no less than 8.2.0**.

Other systems, arch and version please refer to [Qemu Download](https://www.qemu.org/download/#linux)

#### 3. Build & Run

```bash
# Clone the base repository
./scripts/get_deps.sh

# Run riscv64 example
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
# When running on a new architecture, you need to generate the configuration file again.
make ARCH=riscv64 defconfig
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y ACCEL=n run

# Run x86_64 example
make ARCH=x86_64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
# When running on a new architecture, you need to generate the configuration file again.
make ARCH=x86_64 defconfig
make ARCH=x86_64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y ACCEL=n run

# Run aarch64 example
make ARCH=aarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
make ARCH=aarch64 defconfig
make ARCH=aarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd ACCEL=n run

# Run Loongarch64 example
make ARCH=loongarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos user_apps
make ARCH=loongarch64 defconfig
make ARCH=loongarch64 AX_TESTCASE=nimbos BLK=y NET=y ACCEL=n run

# Run another example (libc testcases)
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=libc user_apps
make ARCH=riscv64 defconfig
# When running libc testcases, you need to enable `fp_simd` feature.
make ARCH=riscv64 AX_TESTCASE=libc BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd ACCEL=n run
```

#### 4. Commands Explanation

```bash
# Clone the base repository
./scripts/get_deps.sh

# Build user applications
make ARCH=<arch> AX_TESTCASE=<testcases> user_apps

# Build kernel
make ARCH=<arch> LOG=<log> AX_TESTCASE=<testcases> build

# Run kernel
make ARCH=<arch> LOG=<log> AX_TESTCASE=<testcases> run
```

Where `testcases` are shown under the `apps/` folder.

`<arch>` should be one of `riscv64`, `aarch64`, `x86_64`, `loongarch64`.

`<log>` should be one of `off`, `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug`, `trace`.

More arguments and targets can be found in [Makefile](./Makefile).

For example, to run the [nimbos testcases](apps/nimbos/) on `qemu-system-x86_64` with log level `info`:

```bash
make ARCH=x86_64 LOG=info AX_TESTCASE=nimbos run
```

Note: Arguments like `NET`, `BLK`, and `GRAPHIC` enable devices in QEMU, which take effect only at runtime, not at build time. More features can be found in the [Cargo.toml of arceos](https://github.com/oscomp/arceos/blob/main/ulib/axstd/Cargo.toml).

## Test for oscomp testcases

We can run [testcases of the OS competition](https://github.com/oscomp/testsuits-for-oskernel/tree/pre-2025) with StarryOS. Guidence can be found in [Starry-Tutorial](https://azure-stars.github.io/Starry-Tutorial-Book/ch03-02.html). 


And you can run the testcases with the following commands:

```bash
# Clone the base repository
./scripts/get_deps.sh

# run the testcases of oscomp on x86_64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=x86_64   # If it reports an error: -accel kvm: failed to initialize kvm: Permission denied, please add `ACCEL=n` argument.

# run the testcases of oscomp on riscv64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=riscv64

# run the testcases of oscomp on aarch64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=aarch64

# run the testcases of oscomp on loongarch64
$ make oscomp_run ARCH=loongarch64
```

To run more testcases from oscomp, you can refer to the [oscomp README](./apps/oscomp/README.md).

## How to add new testcases

To allow the kernel to run user-written test cases, temporary test cases can be created. 


If you want to add source codes of the testcases, you can refer to the [libc testcases](./apps/libc) and add your source codes in the [c testcase](./apps/libc/c/) folder, and append the [testcase_list](./apps/libc/testcase_list) with your testcase name. Then you can run the testcases with the following commands:

```sh
make AX_TESTCASE=libc user_apps ARCH=$(YOUR_ARCH)
make AX_TESTCASE=libc BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd ACCEL=n run ARCH=$(YOUR_ARCH)
```

If you want to add **executable file** directly, the specific steps are as follows:

   1. Create a temporary test case folder

      ```sh
      cd apps && mkdir custom && cd custom
      ```

   2. Create a `Makefile` in the current directory and fill in the following content:

      ```makefile
      all: build

      build:

      clean:
          rm -rf *.out
      ```

      The reason for creating an empty build `Makefile` is that when Starry packages test case images, it will first execute the test case's build program by default. However, since our temporary test case does not currently have a defined build program, `make all` does not need to perform any operations.

   3. Copy your **executable file** into the current directory.

   4. Create a `testcase_list` file in the current directory and add the relative path of the executable file that needs to be executed. Note that this path should be relative to `apps/custom` (i.e., the current directory). In our example, the content should be:

      ```sh
      hello
      ```

   5. Return to the project root directory and run the following command:

      ```sh
      sudo ./build_img.sh -fs ext4 -file apps/custom
      cp disk.img .arceos/disk.img
      make defconfig
      make AX_TESTCASE=custom ARCH=x86_64 BLK=y NET=y FEATURES=fp_simd,lwext4_rs LOG=off ACCEL=n run
      ```

      This completes the execution of the custom test case.
